NYU Tandon School of Engineering April 14, 2026
Computer Science and Engineering
CS6083, Spring 2026
Project #1 (due April 27)
The goal in this semester’s course project is to build a web-based collaboration system called snickr, similar to Slack, that
allows members of a team to build workspaces, create channels within these workspaces, and then communicate within
these channels. If you are not familiar with Slack, it might be a good idea to try it out in order to better understand some
of the features described in the following. If you already know Slack, be aware that what you should build may differ in
some ways from what you are used to in Slack. There are other existing systems that offer similar features, but Slack is the
closest.
In this first part of the course project, you will focus on designing a suitable relational schema that can be used to store the
data in the system. In the second part of the project, you will then build a web-accessible frontend that will allow users to
use the service via their browsers.
Now a little more about the system. Users have to be able to sign up for the system by providing an email address, and can
then choose a username, nickname, and password. Later of course they should be able to log in, use the system, and log out.
A user can then create workspaces in order to allow efficient communication between a group of people. For example, a
user may create one workspace for a company that she runs, and another one for the members of her building’s coop board.
A workspace should have a suitable name and maybe a short description. The creator becomes the administrator of the
created workspace, though she may later select some other members of the workspace to act as additional administrators.
Administrators of a group can invite other people, say the people in the company or on the coop board, to join the workspace
(and can also remove members if needed). The invited people can then join the workspace, if necessary after first signing
up as users.
Any user in a workspace can create channels, identified by names. There are three types of channels, public, private,
and direct. Any user in the workspace can join any public channel, and can then read the messages in the channel and
add their own messages. Private channels can only be joined by those users in the workspace that are invited by the
channel creator. Direct channels are for messages between just two users, and can only be seen by those two users. For
example, in a workspace for faculty members in a university department, there might be public channels for discussions
on undergraduate education and on graduate admissions, a private channel on hiring and promotion decisions that is only
accessible to members of the relevant committee, and various direct channels between faculty members as they see fit.
Each channel contains a sequence of messages posted by channel members, ordered chronologically. A message is basically
just a piece of text, possibly with images, hyperlinks, emojis, or rich text markup but you do not have to worry about those
for now. For simplicity, you do not need to support threading within a channel, so each channel is just a simple sequence
of messages. Also, while Slack has certain features that are only available to paying (premium) customers, you do not have
to worry about payment issues here. Just assume everything is free. You also do not have to support deletion of channels
or of individual messages by administrators, though a real system would certainly have this. Finally, for the first part of the
project, you do not have to worry about notification mechanisms to alert users to new messages.
So this describes the main ideas behind the system. Before starting your work, you should think about what you envision
the final system to look like, what data needs to be stored, and what kind of operations need to be performed. For example,
there should be a login page, a page where a user can sign up for the first time (by supplying an email address and choosing
a user name), and a page where users can create or update their profiles. Users should be able to make new workspaces
and channels, invite other users to those workspaces and channels, add additional administrators to their workspaces, join
workspaces and channels if they receive an invitation, and of course they should be able to read, post, and search for
messages.
Project Guidelines: In this first part of the course project, you will have to design the relational database that stores all
the information about users, workspaces, channels, workspace administrators, invitations and accepted memberships for
workspaces and channels, and messages. In the second part of the project, you have to design a browser-accessible interface
for this system. You should use your own database system on your laptop or an internet-accessible server. Use a system
that supports text operators such as like and contains. Both parts of the project may be done individually or in teams of two
students. You will receive an email from the TAs asking you to sign up as a group. The second part of the project will be
due around May 10. Note that the second project builds on top of this one, so you cannot skip this project.
Two more remarks: First, it is recommended to always store time stamps (time and date) with any action such as posting of
a message, or creation of workspaces and channels. Second, you should of course not use database permissions or views to
implement content access restrictions, such as which user can see which message. There should not be a separate DBMS
account for each user, but the web interface and application itself will log into the database. Thus, the system you implement
can see all the content, but has to make sure at the application level that each logged-in user is identified through the use of
cookies in the second part of the project, and then restrict accesses appropriately.
Project Steps: Following is a list of steps for this part of the project. Note that in this first part, you will only deal with the
database side of this project - a suitable web interface will be designed in the second project, where you will also have a
little more freedom in what to exactly implement.
(a) Design, justify, and create an appropriate database schema for the above situation. Make sure your schema is space
efficient. Show an ER diagram of your design, and a translation into relational format. Identify keys and foreign key
constraints. Note that you may have to revisit your design if it turns out later that the design is not suitable. Discuss any
assumptions you made that impact the model.
(b) Use a relational database system to create the schema, together with key, foreign key, and other constraints.
(c) Write SQL queries (or sequences of SQL queries) for the following tasks. You may use suitable placeholder values in
the statements.
(1) Create a new user account, with email, name, nickname, and password.
(2) Create a new public channel inside a workspace by a particular user. (Make sure to check that the user is authorized
to do so.)
(3) For each workspace, list all current administrators.
(4) For each public channel in a given workspace, list the number of users that were invited to join the channel more than
5 days ago and that have not yet joined.
(5) For a particular channel, list all messages in chronological order.
(6) For a particular user, list all messages they have posted in any channel.
(7) For a particular user, list all messages that are accessible to this user and that contain the keyword “perpendicular” in
the body of the message. By accessible, we mean that the user must be a member of the workspace and the particular
channel where the message occurs.
(d) Populate your database with some sample data, and test the queries you have written in part (c). Make sure to input
interesting and meaningful data and to test a number of cases. Limit yourself to a few users, workspaces, and channels, but
make sure there is enough data to generate interesting test cases. It is suggested that you design your test data very carefully.
Draw and submit a little diagram that shows your test data (not a long list of insert statements) and discuss the structure of
the data.
(e) Document and log your design and testing appropriately. Submit a properly documented description and justification
of your entire design, including ER diagrams, tables, constraints, queries, procedures, and tests on sample data, and a few
pages of description. This should be a paper of say 8-12 pages with introduction, explanations, ER and other diagrams, etc.,
that you will then revise and expand in the second part.
